Header1 Interaction
Header2 %%mtime(%m/%d/%Y)

%!options: --headers --toc --toc-level=2

Header3

Thanks to Jim Crowell for creating the Syzygy interaction code support.

This page documents the
classes for handling user interaction with virtual objects--more
generally, conversion of input events to virtual world events. Virtual
world events are divided into two categories: changes to an object's
placement matrix (placement = position + orientation) and everything
else. These classes are designed to provide a reasonably simple yet
flexible way to handle this conversion, with some common behaviors
encapsulated in the supplied classes.

%%toc


=Concepts & Classes=

An //interactable// is
an object capable of receiving virtual world events. These are
instantiated in subclasses of the //arInteractable// abstract class. You can
either create your own //arInteractable// subclasses or use the
provided //arCallbackInteractable// class, which allows you to
install function pointers to implement special behaviors.

An //effector// is a
representation of a mobile physical input device, such as our wireless
gamepad with a tracking sensor attached. A given input device can be
represented by more than one effector if different parts of the device
are used for different functions. These are represented by the //arEffector// class.

An //interaction selector//
is an algorithm for determining which (if any) of a set of interactables
a given effector will interact with. It's basically a distance
measurement, the idea being that the effector will select the
interactable that is closest to it by some measure. These are
represented by subclasses of the abstract //arInteractionSelector// class. Examples are
//arDistanceInteractionSelector//, which selects based on
the Euclidean distance between effector and interactable, and //arAlwaysInteractionSelector//,
 which always allows
interaction with any object it comes across (for distance-independent
interaction).

A //drag behavior// is
a placement-matrix-altering virtual world event. An example would be
maintaining a fixed relationship with an effector over time as the
effector is waved around. These are instantiated in subclasses of the
abstract //arDragBehavior// class. An example of this
is the //arWandRelativeDrag//, which implements the
behavior just described.

A //triggering condition//
or //grab condition// is a condition on the input event stream that
must be satisfied for a&nbsp;  drag behavior to be activated. These are
represented by the //arGrabCondition// class.
The only remaining class
to mention is the //arDragManager//, which keeps track of
which triggering conditions activate which drag behavior, and
determines which drag behaviors should currently be active.
Interactables and effectors both have drag managers. By default, the
effector's drag manager is used, but this setting can be overruled on
an interactable-by-interactable basis.


=Usage Example: cubes.cpp=

The following is a fairly
detailed explanation of some snippets taken from src/demo/cubes.cpp.
This is a Distributed Scene Graph application in which a cubical space
around the user is filled with small objects of various shapes that
rotate and change textures at random. The effect of the interaction
code is to define a visible virtual wand that the user can wave around
and use to drag any of the virtual objects with. When an object is
dragged within two feet of the head, it temporarily takes the texture
of the wand. We use the arCallbackInteractable class to mediate
interaction with each of the objects; this is the easiest way to add
interaction to a program that wasn't designed with interaction in mind.


==Declarations==

```
arCallbackInteractable interactionArray[NUMBER_CUBES];
std::list<arInteractable*> interactionList;
```

We define an array of
arCallbackInteractables, one for each virtual object, and a list to
hold a pointer to each element of the array.

```
arEffector dragWand( 1, 6, 2, 2, 0, 0, 0 );
arEffector headEffector( 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 );
```

We define two arEffectors
to drive the interactions. Going through the constructor arguments for
dragWand: it uses input matrix event #1 to determine its position and
orientation. It maintains information about 6 button events. These
start at input button event #2 and can be extracted using indices
starting with 2; in other words, this effector will receive a copy of
button events 2-7 which can be extracted from the effector using their
input indices.

This requires a bit of
explanation. An arEffector has the capability to remap the indices of
ranges of input events. Consider the following scenario: The user is
wearing two data gloves which you desire to function in exactly the
same way. For example, you might map certain gestures into button
events, and you want the same gesture to allow you to grab an object
with either hand. This gesture will probably be mapped onto different
button events in the input stream, depending on the originating hand.
You can use the arEffector to remap these different events onto the
same button event. E.g., if you'd defined 5 distinct gestures for each
hand, corresponding to button events 0-4 for the right hand and 5-9 for
the left, and the two hands were assigned placement matrices 1 and 2,
then you might declare:

```
arEffector rightHand( 1, 5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 );
arEffector leftHand( 1, 5, 5, 0, 0, 0, 0 );
```

You would then be able to
access e.g. button event #0 using rightHand.getButton(0) and button event #5 using
leftHand.getButton(0) (which is a Good Thing if
you want them to have the same effect).

The last three numbers are
the equivalent for axis events, so in all these cases we're specifying
that we won't be needing any.

The headEffector uses
input matrix #0 (assumed to be read from a sensor attached to the
user's head) and has no buttons or axes.


==Initialization==

First, in main() we specify some more
things about the effectors:

```
dragWand.setInteractionSelector( arDistanceInteractionSelector( 5 ) );
headEffector.setInteractionSelector( arDistanceInteractionSelector( 2 ) );
```

This says that we want the
object to be interacted with to be selected on the basis of the minimum
Euclidean distance, with a maximum interaction range of 5 feet for the
dragWand and 2 ft. for the headEffector. Normally we'd use a smaller
interaction range than 5 ft., but in this instance I wanted it to be
easy to get this to work with the simulator interface program
[inputsimulator InputSimulator.html] on a non-stereo-enabled display.

```
dragWand.setTipOffset( arVector3(0,0,-WAND_LENGTH) );
```

Here we specify that the
effector's "hot spot" (the point used in computing the wand-object
distance by the interaction selector) will not be right at the position
indicated by the effector's placement matrix, but will instead be
offset forwards by WAND_LENGTH (2 ft.).

```
dragWand.setDrawCallback( drawWand );
```

This is how we make the
virtual wand visible. I won't put the code in here, but if you look in
cubes.cpp you'll see that we've defined a textured rod object that
measures .2 ft x .2 ft x WAND_LENGTH. drawWand is a pointer to a
function that uses the scene-graph function
dgTransform()
to modify this rod's placement matrix such that it always extends
between the tracked input device and the effector hot spot.

```
dragWand.setDrag( arGrabCondition( AR_EVENT_BUTTON, 2, 0.5 ),
                                      arWandRelativeDrag() );
dragWand.setDrag( arGrabCondition( AR_EVENT_BUTTON, 6, 0.5 ),
                                      arWandRelativeDrag() );
dragWand.setDrag( arGrabCondition( AR_EVENT_BUTTON, 7, 0.5 ),
                                      arWandRelativeDrag() );
```

Here we specify that we want the
arWandRelativeDrag behavior to occur whenever
the value of buttons 2, 6, or 7 exceeds 0.5. This behavior makes the
dragged object maintain a fixed relationship to the effector hot spot;
translating the hotspot translates the object, rotating the wand causes
the object to rotate about the hotspot.

Next, in worldInit(), we hook up each
interactable to a virtual object (more specifically, to the virtual
object's placement matrix, since that's what we want to modify via
interaction):

```
arCallbackInteractable cubeInteractor(
                       dgTransform( cubeParent, navNodeName, arMatrix4() )
                       );
```

Each arCallbackInteractable has an
ID field. Here in
one swell foop we add a matrix node to the scene graph (attached to the
navigation matrix node, but that's another chapter) and assign its ID
(returned by dgTransform()
to the interactable.

```
cubeInteractor.setMatrixCallback( matrixCallback );
cubeInteractor.setMatrix( cubeTransform );
```

Here we set the
interactable's matrix callback--this is a pointer to a function that
gets called whenever the interactable's matrix is modified) to a
function that copies the interactable's matrix into the database node
with the interactable's ID. Then we go ahead and set the matrix to the
pre-computed value.

```
cubeInteractor.setProcessCallback( processCallback );
```

Then we set the object's
event-processing callback to a pointer to a function that changes the
object's texture if it is touched by the headEffector and grabbed by
the dragWand.

```
interactionArray[i] = cubeInteractor;
interactionList.push_back( (arInteractable*)(interactionArray+i) );
```

Finally, we copy the
interactable into the array and push its address onto the end of the
list.


==Interaction Loop==

Once cubes starts running,
things happen in two distinct threads. In the main()
 thread, we:

```
headEffector.updateState( framework->getInputState() );
dragWand.updateState( framework->getInputState() );
dragWand.draw();
```

Which copies the current
state of the relevant input events from the framework into the
effectors and then calls the drawCallback installed above. In the
worldAlter() thread, we use the
interactables in two ways:

```
interactionArray[iCube].setMatrix( randMatrix );
```

When not being interacted
with, the virtual objects rotate randomly. We have to do all placement
matrix manipulations via the corresponding interactable to ensure that
the two placement matrices remain in sync with one another, so all
modifications to the object's placement matrix are accomplished using
the interactable's setMatrix()
method.

```
ar_pollingInteraction( dragWand, interactionList );
ar_pollingInteraction( headEffector, interactionList );
```

Finally, we handle user
interaction with virtual objects by each effector; this is where most
of the work gets done. The function
ar_pollingInteraction() is contained in
arInteractionUtilities.cpp. There are two versions
of it, the one used here which accepts a list of pointers to
interactables as its second argument and another which accepts the
address of a single interactable. It will be worthwhile to explain in
some detail what this function does. First, a couple more concepts:

An object is //touched//
when it has been selected for interaction by an effector's interaction
selector. If it was not touched on the previous frame, then its
touch() method is called; this in
turn calls the virtual protected _touch()
method, which you need to define in an arInteractable subclass. In the
//arCallbackInteractable// subclass, this calls the
optional touchCallback that you've installed. If,
on the other hand, an object was touched on the last frame but isn't
any longer, then its untouch()
method is called (which analogously calls your
_untouch() method or untouchCallback).
An interactable can be
touched by multiple effectors simultaneously; it can even be touched by
one effector while it is grabbed by another (see below).

When an object is touched,
it determines whether it satisfies a grab condition, either its own or
the effector's depending on how the useDefaultDrags
 flag is set. If so, it //requests
a grab// from the effector; if that succeeds, the object is //grabbed//
by that effector. That object remains locked to that effector (the
effector is forced to interact with that object only, and the object
can't be grabbed by another effector) until any relevant grab
conditions fail. While the object is grabbed, its placement matrix is
modified by the drag behaviors associated with any active grab
conditions. The object remains grabbed even if it gets far enough away
from the effector that it would ordinarily no longer be touched. In
fact, this was the initial reason for locking the effector and object
together during a grab; if the grab were based only on a distance
computation, then it would be possible to lose hold of an object by
dragging it too quickly.

Finally, provided the
object is still touched after all the rest of this occurs, the
interactable's virtual _processInteraction()
method is called (which calls the optional processCallback
if it's an arCallbackInteractable).

Back to ar_pollingInteraction().
It behaves as follows:

(1) Check to see if this
effector is grabbing an object. If it is but that object isn't one of
the ones passed, return; if it is one of the ones passed, select it for
interaction and interact with it, then return.

(2) Check to see if any
passed object gets touched. If no object is touched but one was on the
previous frame, or one is touched but it's not the same object the
effector was touching on the last frame, call the previously-touched
object's untouch() method.

(3) If there's a touched object, call its
processInteraction() method. This first
determines whether or not it was touched no the previous frame; if not,
it calls the object's own touch()
method. It then goes
through the sequence described just above.


