Header1 Future Directions
Header2
%%mtime(%m/%d/%Y)
%!options: --headers

Header3

The Syzygy software is still evolving. At this stage, the API for
writing master/slave cluster applications is stable. Please feel free
to write to that API and expect that code will link and run on future
releases. On the other hand, the lower level building blocks still need
work, especially the communications infrastructure and the scene graph
code. What follows is an outline of things to be changed:

+ A better communications infrastructure needs to be added to support
different methods of communication (for instance over shared memory)
other than sockets.
+ It would be nice to include support for different networking locales
in the configuration file.
+ It should be possible to run applications in a stand-alone mode.
(i.e. as a single process and without an szgserver or any such stuff)
+ Deterministic shut-down of components is required.
+ The graphics database code needs to be changed so that it has more
features and is a bit less toy-like.
+ Text configuration files should
be supported as a default over the Syzygy parameter database.
+ Input device drivers should be .dll's or .so's, depending on platform.
+ A reusable way to modify/filter input device events should be
implemented. Part of this would be a configuration file that detailed
opeartions on received values (like scaling).
+ Better components for the VR programing frameworks would
facilitate creating new frameworks with a minimal time investment.
