Header1 Input Classes
Header2
%%mtime(%m/%d/%Y)
%!options: --headers

Header3

There are three basic types of input classes: sources, nodes, and
sinks. An arInputSource
receives events and feeds them to an arInputNode,
which in turn relays them to one or more //arInputSinks// after optionally
[filtering InputFilters.html] them. An arInputSink may
transmit the events to some other location or may perform arbitrary
operations based on the input stream. The arInputNode maintains a list
of arInputSources and arInputSinks.

Two important arInputSource subclasses are the //arNetInputSource//, which receives a
stream of input events from a remote computer and makes it available to
the local process, and the arFileSource,
which reads an event stream from a file and feeds it to the local
process, using the internal event time stamps to control the pace.
Corresponding arInputSink classes are the //arNetInputSink// and //arFileSink//, which make an input
stream available over the network or write it to a file, respectively.

An arInputNode processes events using two subsidiary classes, the
//arInputEventQueue// and the //arInputState//. The arInputNode
receives an arStructuredData record
from an input source and unpacks it into an arInputEventQueue. It then
passes each event in the queue through its list of [arIOFilters InputFilters.html]. For each stage in this
filtering chain it maintains an arInputState representing the most
recent values of all received events; this allows the filter to perform
computations based on the current event and the most recent state of
all other events. Finally, it packs the filtered event queue into a new
arStructuredData record and passes it to each of its arInputSinks.
