Syzygy Documentation: Sound
Integrated Systems Lab
%%mtime(%m/%d/%Y)
%!options: --headers
%!encoding: iso-8859-1

[Table of Contents index.html]

Thanks to Camille Goudeseune for creating Syzygy sound support.

Syzygy sound support is based on the [FMOD Sound System www.fmod.org],
copyright © Firelight Technologies Pty, Ltd., 1994-2006.

Sound in Syzygy works much like the [distributed scene graph SceneGraph.html].
If you already understand that, this document should pose few surprises.

If you are writing your own custom code instead of using the
arDistSceneGraphFramework or arMasterSlaveFramework objects
(as all the demos included with this distribution do), first call
dsSetSoundDatabase() before issuing any other API calls.
The framework objects hide this detail.
```
  arSoundDatabase soundDatabase;
  dsSetSoundDatabase(&soundDatabase);
```

(The prefix "ds" used by all functions in this API stands for
"distributed sound".  The distributed graphics API uses "dg" by analogy.)

An arSoundDatabase object receives a stream of data records
causing it to alter its internal contents, just like arGraphicsDatabase.
It similarly manages a tree of objects derived from class arSoundNode.
Like arGraphicsNode, arSoundNode's three methods receiveData(), render(),
and dumpData() respectively receive, play via a low-level sound library,
and send sound data.

Sound state is synchronized across multiple machines by replicating
arSoundDatabase objects on each machine.  The master machine has an
arSoundServer, while slaves have arSoundClients.  (Only clients make
sound API calls, just like only graphics clients make OpenGL calls.)
The mechanism of synchronization is analogous to that of graphics.

If your syzygy program renders graphics and sound,
you must build a tree of arSoundNodes
somewhat in parallel to the tree of arGraphicsNodes.
This is arguably cumbersome if the trees are "identical", but more
often the sound tree looks like a subset of the graphics tree
(not //everything// you see, you can also hear), with a few
extra leaves near the root for ambient sounds not attached to
particular visual objects.

Such a tree would start much like the graphics tree:

```
  int transformNodeID = dsTransform("world", "root", theMatrix);
```

The ID returned by dsTransform() will differ from that returned by
dgTransform(), so use a different variable to store it!  The demos
like src/demo/cubes/cubes.cpp use arrays of size 2 to store IDs
which are "duplicates".  You are of course free to use your own
naming convention instead.

To modify the node's matrix,
dsTransform(int ID, arMatrix4 theMatrix)
behaves just like dgTransform().  If you want an arSoundNode to stay
"attached" to a corresponding arGraphicsNode, make sure to call dsTransform()
and dgTransform() together.

The only other important API call is
```
dsLoop(int ID, string filename, int fLoop, float loudness, arVector3 xyz)
```

Create the loop node as a child of a dsTransform() node;  the parent node's matrix
defines the loop node's coordinate system, just like a scene graph for graphics.
dsLoop() plays a sound file "filename" (of format .wav or .mp3).  Loudness is scaled
by the scalar "loudness", 0 = silent, 1 = unity gain.  The sound's 3D coordinates
are given by "xyz".  (The listener's position is handled by the arDistSceneGraphFramework and arMasterSlaveFramework objects.)

Having created a loop node, this call modifies the sound "loop" playing at that point.
"fLoop" can have one of three values.
-  1: Start looping the sound continuously.
-  -1: Trigger the sound (play it exactly once).
-  0: If it was looping, stop looping immediately.
If it was triggered, reset the trigger.  (A trigger is
an event, not a state.  The scene graph distributes state, not events.
So we fake the trigger event by means of a state transition from 0 to -1.)



